Hi, everyone.
Welcome to the blue Hoop podcast produced by basketball Victoria I'm Rob Colder,
the coach development officer for basketball.
Victoria on the home bench. We have the high performance coach for Vic Metro. Mike
Zeel Robbie. Good to be here, mate.
And on the away bench, we have the high performance coach for Vic Country.
Justin Schuler.
We boys welcome both of you guys.
Uh,
the goal of this podcast is try and
give coaches some extra information to help with their
time coaching athletes and also give you something
to listen to as you're driving around Victoria,
coaching all these athletes at the same time,
there's any topics you want discussed or
some extra information or anything that you
need to help with your coaching that we go over on the podcast.
You can grab all our details from the basketball
Victoria website and make contact with us from there.
Uh,
everyone will be happy to field all of your copious
amounts of emails and everything that goes with that,
as we probably have a rough,
you know, listenership of about 31
a
day.
Uh,
so our topic this week is team selection and trials.
It's a fairly timely point at this stage, given.
Everyone's probably going through that at V JB L level.
I know at the Bar of Victoria World,
we've been going through that with Southern Cross Challenge trials
and I
selections for the coming year and everything that goes with it.
But, uh,
do you want to talk us through just your selection so far with country Justin and
you
guys went a bit.
I guess ours starts with, uh, under 12 identification more than selection, uh,
at our jamboree.
Um, And then the last two weeks, we've had, uh, Gold Nugget camp,
which is our under 14 selection trials for Southern Cross.
Um and then we've had our MITP and and cup trials as well,
which is under fifteens through the eighteens
uh,
around about 800 odd kids over that period of time. So,
uh, tough to to
do.
But the good thing from a programme point of view
is we feel we've left some really good athletes out,
which
sounds pretty mean, but we feel when we're doing that,
that means our programmes are going in the right direction.
So hopefully an exciting year ahead.
Definitely, Mike, what about you guys with the Metro?
Mm. Yeah.
We just finished our SCC selections, Uh, during the school holidays,
the September holidays.
Uh, and, uh,
those athletes will now go and and prepare for the tournament in in January.
Uh, so NITP was selected throughout the year, Uh, across two phases of selections.
And those athletes have just started,
uh, with term four now.
So, uh, we kind of split up the selections for those two things across the year and,
uh, try to stagger the starts for both of them as well. Yeah. Awesome.
And you guys have obviously got a lot of country and metro coaches
involved within the NITP programme and jamboree and everything that goes to that
Southern cross.
Uh, head coaches go about getting involved in those sorts of things.
Best thing for us is, uh, Craig Hockley, who's based up in the Bendigo office.
Uh, he does
a
great job to get out to people and make sure they're aware of what's going on. We had
over 40 coaches on the floor over over our selection trial period, which was
outstanding for us. And
one thing we like to do with the trial phase is bring him in early, Do some PD with it.
So everyone's on the same page for the selection day.
Uh, understand our criteria, and away we go, And, uh, it was it was really great to
to have that opportunity. You know, we had
Olympic level experience there down to your first time coach. So,
uh, good. Good mix throughout, but a great result to have that many coaches on deck.
Mm. And similar with metro. Uh, the best way to get involved is just reach out.
Uh, and it's awesome. And we can get
new coaches involved, uh, in our camp situations and our camp environments,
cos that's where you you kind of, you know, pinch a drill or two.
But you also start to build that rapport.
Um, with other coaches in the coaching fraternity,
which I think is important, co, uh,
coaching is a sharing kind of business. Like what? What? I what I
value as a coach,
uh, might also be valuable to someone else.
And I think the more we can share and and build that culture of, uh,
information sharing and, uh, professional development, I think that's, uh,
the better way to go. Yeah, definitely.
And you know I talk about this a fair bit when
I go and present coaching courses is just steal from everyone.
It's There are not many unique thoughts left in basketball at this stage.
It's been around forever, but
just go and steal what you can from whoever you can and
just build your coaching network that goes with that as well.
It, uh,
it always makes you a better coach being able to talk basketball with other people.
I think along the way,
I think a big thing with that as well is I know all of us came through,
uh, getting PD just because people open the door and,
uh, for bus or Victoria programme.
It's definitely an open door policy and anyone's welcome at any time. Absolutely.
I think that's great.
Well, given everyone's dealing with V JB L trials.
At the moment, it's, uh, both country and Metro have got all their stuff done.
Uh, I noticed some clubs have already finished, uh,
which is incredibly efficient by them.
It's, um,
looking at some of the trials and clubs over the weekend.
They've got upwards of 100 kids rolling in for for one age group in particular.
That's that's a lot of numbers to be dealing with as well. So
I mean, the admin side
probably goes first from that end.
Uh, most of these guys will have registered online and things like that, um,
some of the clubs will have got out and
identified kids through their domestic programme as well.
Some people give out invites.
Some people just say, Hey, everyone, come on in and I wait, you go.
Um,
in terms of sort of running your own V JB L trials.
What are some of the things you'd wanna cover off before that
initial walk in the door? And hey, here's 100 kids.
You gotta try and pick four or five teams from that.
What are some of the things you'd probably look at to start off with?
I guess we, you know, from a state level depth charts from that under 12 age group,
right through and I.
I think that'd be a great practise for clubs to to embrace is
have some prior knowledge. Where do you see them sitting year in year out?
It allows you to actually identify
the new kids better,
um, and see where they fit. Is there a need for that age group?
And I know some clubs have the policy of not
recruiting over the top of what they already have,
so it helps make sure there's good team balance, etcetera, etcetera.
Uh, but making sure yeah, you've got some prior knowledge,
I think is is pretty valuable when you've got those
sorts of numbers and it should really be easier.
I suppose
the time you get to the older age groups,
you probably should have kids that have been
in your programme between six and eight years.
I mean, it sounds ridiculous,
but you almost may not need many tryouts for your older kids
and know who's coming through the door.
That's that's a major one,
and then also know who is gonna be on the floor for you
as a coach as well cos you can have 100 kids come in.
Uh, if you've got three coaches for 100 kids, it's hard to look at 33 kids each,
uh, and identify all those kids.
So know how many coaches you're gonna need per athlete or if you've got
a ratio that you wanna work to to make sure that every kid,
uh, is properly evaluated through that process as well. Yeah, definitely.
I think it's, um,
like a pretrial meeting of some sort with your coaches in your age group.
Coaches would certainly help your director of coaching
Whoever that may be at your club.
Uh, it may be worth getting in some coaches just to run your trials.
Uh, just so you're not the one.
I mean, if you're the head coach of that age group,
you're not the one trying to evaluate and pick your own team as well as try and
make sure all the drills are running and
the baskets are going and everything like that.
You guys have done that sort of thing before with yours?
Yeah, like I think, Well,
speaking on the countryside like definitely having a a pretrial
meeting where everyone understands what we're actually looking for,
You know, numbers that we're looking at is important as well,
so that everyone actually really whittles it down.
Something we talk to the coaches about is having their own shopping lists
as well and the things that they're just looking for in athletes,
I think with what Zapp said they're about,
you know, know your coaches. And maybe they have something that they're looking at,
uh, in in each kid. But more eyes are better in my
And one thing that I,
you know,
we found in this last selection period was making sure the coach is rotated.
Sounds like
a simple thing.
But,
you know, it was midway through that first session and trials,
and the coaches that still work with the same kids
you got to and we rotate baskets or keep the coach where they are and
just get different kids through because everyone's
got a different take on a different kid
and a a kid
might make two shots for me.
And then I turn around and he goes, Oh, for three for you, Like it's
It's not a good evaluation, but your shopping list is interesting.
Speak a little bit about that, Cos
uh, that's something that I think, uh,
all coaches and all evaluators of talent have to have,
because if you haven't got one, like, what are you actually looking at?
And how does this kid actually know what they're being,
uh,
evaluated
so that
that that for us, has been, uh,
probably the last three years now Pretty consistent in one B.
One offensive ability,
uh, one B, one defensive ability, shooting ability, competitiveness,
basketball, IQ,
Um, you know, and just being able to understand
out of that what we're really looking for,
uh, you know, so that each athlete has different elements of that, that there's in
intrinsic parts to that, and
everyone's gonna have a different feel for what that means. But
they're the areas that we say.
Oh, well, if you're going to play for the country,
that you have to have at least three of those
areas ticked off to a A really competent level,
um,
to
the, uh
and
I think what's important is that you're
evaluating things that the athlete can execute.
Like you're not saying that your point guard gets cut or
gets put in a second or third team cos they're a,
uh, subpar offensive rebounder
like that's an unfair evaluation.
Um, and it's not something that goes from team to team,
and on that as well. Like competitiveness could mean that they're an outstanding
rebound of their position so that it can be broken into whatever. But
100% agree that, then that way everyone's on the same page and then we can Alright,
now we can have some robust discussion about.
Well, do they really separate themselves in that area to someone else?
And it's a consistency.
The other part for me is the feedback, the rhythm, feedback, the verbal feedback.
Again,
you've got five areas that you're looking at so making sure
that that they understand that and and can go from there.
I think that's really important.
Like you'd cover all this off in your pretrial meeting.
I mean, you would have your your head coach probably gets the
in a lot of ways, the easiest job,
because their kids tend to stand out fairly quickly.
Who are the best 10 kids they're looking at?
Or however many kids they're looking to pick,
uh, and it gets a little bit harder as you go down the list as well.
And I mean,
every coach will have their own philosophy or style
that they want to play with or coach with,
so it becomes a little bit harder. But I think as long as
on the same page, uh,
and the only way you're gonna get that is just a quick meeting before trials and say,
Hey, here's what we're looking at
Realistically,
if you have a trial of 60 kids,
the first or the best team will probably stand out fairly early.
Probably the worst team will stand out fairly early as well.
Then there's that middle ground,
which is probably the hardest bit to pick out of as well.
Cos you might have two kids that have great one V one offence, Um,
and then two kids that have great one V one defence.
And now you're starting to weigh up everything else that goes with it as well.
What's the perfect number?
What's the perfect number? Per hoop per
per
our
selections
This year. I worked on an eight player to a hoop ratio.
Uh, and I just found that
athletes are able to get more reps.
Uh, you can play four on four.
if you needed to do anything three on three,
you can definitely work with the other other end of the basket.
Other end of the court. But
eight athletes to a hoop. It just it. It seemed to work for us this year.
It allowed coaches to when we got competitive in the
full court to rotate three subs instead of five.
and I felt all athletes were able to get a AAA fair crack at it. So,
uh, eight out of baskets, kind of what we've worked out for metro camps this year.
I think in Max is 15.
But if it is 15, your session plan has to fit that many.
So there isn't standing around.
They're not, you know, just sitting there going, What's going on?
Like, I think your planning's pretty important. I know some of our centres.
You got two courts, max, and that's it. So
you gotta make do. But,
uh, you know, to me, as long as you're fitting around,
that bracket 8 to 15 is coming Your max point coach, per hoop,
Um, and then your session plan fits
that.
They get lots of trial and error reps, so there's not,
As you said one time they get to shoot and they that the limit on that one make or miss,
uh, that there's multiple opportunities and
and time to evaluate.
That's a pretty good segue you've made there.
It's almost like we've planned this that now we start talking about
sort of your session plan and what the content's gonna be like.
How are you going to evaluate these athletes during the session? It's,
um I mean, in years gone by,
we've done a whole heap of drill work and we do sort
of alley drill and we sort of see what that looks like.
And then we might do some shooting. But
you don't really get much of a feel.
I don't think for trying to evaluate talent as well. Like,
what are some of the things that you would put into your session plans?
I'm really big on the competitive stuff. I wanna just
I could almost just watch kids play for an hour and a
half and then try and pick the eyes out of that.
But what are sort of the the situations I suppose you put them into
to make assessments on them?
Yeah.
I mean,
Zep
and I are similar on this and go for a Z.
I
think we're on the same
page
and it comes back to that shopping list as well.
Like if you're gonna find out if you've got one on one basketball players,
you do have to play a significant amount of something, uh, one on 12123 on three.
Where they are,
uh, in those situations.
So to be able to evaluate if that is on your shopping list,
make sure the drills marry up to that really important.
Uh, something that I put into, uh, our selection camps here is some, uh,
form of full court passing drill.
Uh,
because I think it is incredibly valuable in a in an international game, you know,
we're talking about kick a head pass, kick ahead, pass.
Uh, let's find out who can actually kick a head pass.
Uh, so if we do com competitive things one on 12 on two. I will try to,
uh,
split those up between a shooting drill in
between a full court passing drill in between,
uh, with the ultimate goal to get to some five on five full court basketball.
I guess I am a little bit different after hearing that
I for a long time now believe that I can't
really genuinely evaluate unless I see you competing and playing.
So we actually don't do any,
uh, kind of breakdown type stuff. We may show something once and then we're away.
Um, but trying to get them into competitive environment as quick as possible.
Uh, like the fundamentals are the fundamentals. And everyone can kind of do that.
In my opinion, when there's not a defensive player there,
but to see them when they they're getting a little bit
of pressure and that that really to me kind of separates
people from the pack. And,
uh, it was interesting, you know, like as I spoke about those trials last week,
huge amount of kids,
But it really was still quite easy to identify who the the top
tier athletes were and who needed to go relevant to that selection criteria.
And it was really what stood out was when we got to five on five game play,
Um, so you know, it's just an interesting there's no right or wrong. I don't think,
um, and I think it depends on your numbers always. But
to me, that's kind of where I've got over time in the high performance evaluation.
Yeah, Dev and I think it's, um it's a really easy way to build it as well.
I mean, it's when you have, you know, 100 kids on two courts.
You're obviously limited with how much? Five on five, you can play as well. So,
um,
three on three is a really great way to get the ball through hands
as well as everyone gets to touch the ball a little bit more.
You can start to make assessments on them
exactly right.
It's You can always find out who can't defend when you're in three on three.
And that might just be one side of the four. That doesn't necessarily need to be
half court.
Some of the older head coaches that I've, uh,
been mentored by used to talk about the Yugoslavian national team and the
PIC.
By any chance,
there's a few of them.
Uh, but there's, um,
they basically went through their whole Olympic campaign right
up to pre tournament in three on three.
Well, they didn't
really get to five on five ever, which,
you know, in a selection period of time, that was quite a few number of years back.
Now, like,
I think there's something that we've learnt from that, and I think in the last,
you know, four or five years from a last Australia point of view,
I think We're doing a much better job
in camp environment of that. Just getting the kids into play and
and evaluating in that way,
I
think it's I mean now you start to get into, um,
your team selection, so to speak.
So you've started to evaluate the talent a little bit.
How much does your system or what you wanna run dictate as to how you pick your team?
It's It's one of those things where,
um,
probably your first five or six kids stand out fairly quickly in terms
of we have to pick those kids cos they're our most talented.
But now you start looking at your end of the bench or your bench players.
Uh, how much does that dictate on how you want to coach?
Compared to just how talented they are?
You might have a kid that's obscenely talented that
doesn't fit your system or how you like coaching.
Is there
a an unwritten rule where you say, Hey,
we're not gonna pick that kid because they don't fit?
Or is it your job as the coach to make that kid fit?
I think that sparks that the old debate of my picking the 10 best players,
my picking players to specifically suit what I wanna do.
And there's a fine balance cos you absolutely want the best athletes on your team,
but your shopping list,
your game plan your your philosophies as a basketball player
as a basketball coach. Sorry, uh, come into it now,
Um,
I like picking the best athletes
and then figuring out one way or the other what to do from there.
Uh, considering my shopping list and philosophies and styles, Um,
but that is something that everyone needs to understand
personally as a coach. Like, where do you sit with that?
And I think there's a massive difference between system and style of play.
So style of play, I think,
is definitely a certain type of athlete that you're looking for.
So if you're wanting to play in the first eight seconds,
you can't select plotters.
But system you should be always able to create strengths for whoever you select.
So I think there's a really definitive difference between the two of that,
and that's about you knowing and being comfortable with
what you can coach and my philosophy is,
you can coach anyone.
You just got to figure out. What? What? Where? That actually makes that.
Yeah. Whereas,
um you know, and especially in a club based system,
I'm sure there's there's layers there that here's our blueprint.
You gotta know that you gotta be able to do it. But then on top of that,
most coaches, I would think, would have the freedom to then be able to
create what they need for that individual athlete.
And that's important for for junior clubs.
Uh, cos there are some in Melbourne that do run, uh,
a similar style of play or and system of
play from under 12 through to their senior programme.
So,
um,
being across that as a as AD OC and then as a as
a coaching staff is is critical because you have to pick teams to,
uh, pick teams and athletes to to suit that.
I think the one thing I've probably taken
from that is you're not gonna pick plotters,
and it's probably a good thing that my junior career is very
much over cos I don't think I'd make too many groups.
I don't think I make too many teams. I did play in all honesty, so
nothing's really changed a whole lot for me there at that point. But
then we start getting into position, like is there?
And this is another huge debate, I suppose, over anything.
Is there such a thing as a 1234 and five anymore?
Have we gone away from that completely like I know, people are like guards, wings,
bigs, and
we're all
going.
It's funny, like, uh,
through country.
We've gone, you know, four guards, four wings, two bigs as a general rule.
But a lot of kids fit within that garden wing spot. Anyway.
Uh, I definitely think there's more. Probably your point guards,
your true centres and then everything else is is the reality of where it is.
And I know from a national team perspective,
that's how we looked at it is who can lead
the the group on the floor who can actually defend
a monster five. And then everyone else needs to be interchangeable. So,
um, I think that's something that comes down to your club philosophy.
And also then after that, you your individual coaching philosophy.
What are you most comfortable with? What do you feel?
You really need to have and then evolve it from there,
and it's interesting.
I've I've kind of working with the terminology at the moment,
like you've got ball handling guards,
you've got athletes and you've got posts and you kind of sit in one of those three.
and then there are some some traits that can, you know, get you an extra,
you know, bonus point. Like if you can shoot the ball. That obviously now moves you up
in that in that group, it doesn't matter where you sit in that group,
Um, but it's interesting how
not only us that we evaluate talent,
but the way the NBA and NBL now evaluates talent and builds out their rosters, it's
it's very different to what it was.
Your point right there,
though to me is the thing that we still do
a really poor job of is identifying just true shooters.
Uh, you know, it's the master skill in the game, but we always tend to Alright,
we'll take the athlete over the kid that can just knock it down.
And uh,
it's something that I look at the last
two worlds campaigns that I've been involved in,
you know, and DJ Vasilevich and Dragon
KZ
they're the ones that got us wins in big games cos they could just flat out shoot it.
Uh, not necessarily the athletes. So
I think that's something that, you know,
All the discussion we're having is really good.
But then
coming down to really understanding what what matters to you and to me,
shooting matters.
And that's where that's where my thought process has gone.
So how do you get that in your trial?
And how do you find the best shooter in your trial when you might
have 50 kids on one court and you're trying to work it out,
which you can actually shoot at them.
So this go comes back to being able to just play and figure it out, because
I think we've all seen, you know, the old trade drills, boys.
You know, I was probably one of them where, you know,
you can shoot uncontested shots till the cows come home, but I couldn't do
that,
but put you in a game, time and space.
But, you know, like, now that really, uh,
determined whether you were really a shooter or not.
And,
um, you know,
uh, Mike McHugh the other week said There's a lot of shooters here,
but not many hitters.
And so we want the hitters.
We want the kids that in games can barely knock down a shot, So
I still believe that that's the way you'll really figure it out is through gameplay.
If you're noticing someone constantly making buckets
and to me, the other part is making sure free throws are part of those games,
seeing if a kid can step up and hit a free throw cos I think it's an undervalued skill.
Um, but making sure that those elements are there, you're gonna figure it out. Yeah.
Oh,
there was a coach I was watching coach the other
day that had part of scrimmage in their trials.
Uh, and every time they had a trial, if one team won their team,
that one had to make the free throw to keep the win.
Otherwise, it was just game on again and you just keep going.
I think it was like first of four.
If one team got the four first, they'd shoot it if they missed it. Game is still on.
It's just like,
yeah,
it's all
as well.
Um, does it change from under 12 to under eighteens.
Like I know you guys have just gone through, like, your jamboree selections
for the country.
Guys, we had some ID camps in here for the, uh, for the metro kids as well.
Does it change
in under twelves how you're picking kids,
like do you look for the long-term athlete that you sit there and say, Hey,
you know what might be a little bit raw at the moment?
But in three or four years time, this kid could turn into a long wing.
That could potentially be a few different things
or even picking for the hero now in number 12.
Well, to me, the shopping list doesn't change, but the actual,
uh, greyness in the selection changes.
So there's a lot more grey at under twelves
versus the black and white at under eighteens,
where you either have it or you don't
under twelves. Definitely. You gotta be looking at body type,
you know? Are they a quick learner? An adaptive learner, you know?
Are they comfortable? You know, do they have a little bit of
swagger and a bit of confidence? Or are they you know, Are they a punk?
You know, like all those sorts of things at that age where you're trying to
really build long-term development plans.
Uh, I think you know that that all comes into it.
But the shopping list, in my opinion, stays the same,
and we use the same in under twelves right through.
So the key on that is
one V. One offence at under twelves means something very different
to an under 18. So
at under twelves, it might be that they can dribble left and right,
you know, So that's one big one offence.
They've got that ability, you know, figure it out and get your loads from there
and with size at the under 12 level, like a lot of the time,
it's hard to project what the little ball handling point guard is
going to to be when he's under 18 or she's under 18.
So I think it's a Justin's point, like you have to be careful not to completely,
uh,
you know,
see the development or projection of a particular athlete
purely based on their size and under twelves,
because
they might end up being a legitimate for
handling point guard who has exceptional speed and quickness by
the time and decision making by the time they're 1617.
1 for me has been the under 14 boys leading scorer at nationals is, uh
most times it ends up, that kid disappears within two years.
Cos they were just a man child at that age where
you know the kid, that's kind of somewhere in between ends up you know,
Long-term projecting pretty good.
So it's understanding that as well, though over the years as a coach,
I think like I'm certain as a younger coach,
it would be like I don't care That guy averaged 20 points a game or whatever.
Uh, as the time goes on, you're having longer-term projections. I think
that changes. But again, at club
where the result is now,
um, sometimes that could help you
kind of progress and and win. And and that's a discussion point as well.
And I think over the last couple of years I mean V, JB L have, uh,
removed zones for under twelves and under fourteens, too.
I think there's been a little bit of, uh,
hesitancy from some coaches to pick the big kids in under twelves
and under Fourteens because there's a little bit of a A.
I don't think they can match up on anyone now. It's more a pressing game.
A man to man principles.
They want the smaller players that can actually cover the ground. Um,
gigs are incredibly valuable to have if you've got them, that can catch and finish.
Um,
but I don't know that you pick kids just because they're big
There is a fine line between Is this kid really raw?
And I can turn them into something. Or are they just a big kid?
Uh, sometimes you just want the most talented kids,
so everyone deserves to be coached.
So you gotta figure out Well, what's the best fit for them at this point in time?
So, you know, big thing I think we do
too often is set people up for favour, not success.
And to me,
like part of the selection process should be Where is this
athlete gonna have most success this year for their long-term development versus
most success for me as a coach to be able to win right now
so that that kind of really has to come into that equation? I think so.
Is it about you or is it about the players? Is It
should be about the
players,
with, um to the point about post players or bigger players at a younger age.
For them to get better, they need the ball thrown to them,
uh, for their psyche. They need to feel like the ball's getting thrown to them,
because in basketball, if we don't throw the ball to them in the post,
they won't develop.
And if they go and play football and they get told to play in the ruck,
they're gonna get told to follow the ball wherever it goes on that day,
and they're gonna get their hands on it an awful lot.
So we have to kind of take that into consideration, too.
Like, yeah, they might turn it over a couple of times.
But we do have to,
you know, if they're on their team, you've got to coach them. Yep, absolutely.
I think it's, um, a really valuable thing as well.
When you start looking at trolls, maybe to the younger age groups,
uh, you probably stay away from set
offences, uh, a little bit more and just give them some basic rules. I think five
has been around forever. It's nothing but ill
to me. Receiver Spot should be
universally known by every Australian athlete coming through cos
that is a big factor Long-term for those athletes.
But outside of that,
um, yeah, absolutely.
It's It should come down to what they can do and
and let them trial and error in a positive environment.
So what are the some of the mistakes you guys have made?
The trials. It's, uh I know the first time I ever went to one of my trials.
I was coaching the 14 2 girls and I sat there
watching these kids get up and down and I'm like,
Man, these are the best five or six athletes there.
At no stage I was ever gonna get those kids. They were never gonna fall to me.
And I spent the entire time watching the best kids,
knowing that I had the twos and I screwed that up.
Roy.
It's what are some of the things that you can
sort of steer coaches away from making the same error?
Do you want me to go
up or you go? I think that's a good point.
Like make sure that you're not fixated on one or two kids. That's that's critical.
Um,
having multiple coaches
with
multiple sets of eyes on kids is really important at a selection.
Because at the end of the day, when we go into a room like this
and talk about you know, number 24
there has to be more than just one viewpoint on the
ale. Like, let's build up the athlete's case to make this team make this squad.
Whatever the case, maybe,
uh, finding the good in every athlete is really important as well.
Like, these athletes are all here because they do something really well.
Uh, our job, we coach everybody.
Our job as coaches is to be able to use that elite talent or their skill,
whatever they've got
for the best of their game and then for our team. So,
uh, a lot of the time we look for athletes that can do all kinds of things. I think
I think that as well as involving that skill as a
coach and just being able to find something good in people like
I mean, how often do you does a coach come and tell you this kid can't do this?
can't do that. Can't do that.
Often. I'll throw at them. Well, what can they do? And they look at you blank.
It's like, you know, that should be the first mindset. What can that kid do
right now? Can they do enough to warrant selection? If they can't, that's OK,
but find what what they can do.
Uh, to me, the other
big errors in the past is just
one preconceived
ideas on what wouldn't work.
So, you know, if someone didn't have something Oh, well,
they can't play for me like that
to me, over time has just been a recipe of failure for, uh, guaranteed
hands down. And
I guess the the other parts that you know really matter in selection
is like just making it comfortable.
You know, like, you know, early days, I want it to be ruthless and, you know, hard.
But like
actually, we want to see the kids at their best,
So finding a way to give them a little bit of comfort.
Massive thing is getting to know their actual
name and call them by their actual name.
Not,
you know, saying Michelle instead of Michael, you know,
like that can really mess with the kid's head on that day.
Like those are the probably the little things that don't seem like a lot.
But ultimately,
you're gonna get a better evaluation of the kid cos they're nervous coming in.
They're
nervous. Their parents are nervous. Uh, so if you can draw that level of comfort,
you know, the family as they come on in?
Uh, yeah, absolutely. Because, yeah,
they'll be
nervous
anyway.
Yeah, and I think you've been hit on a really valuable one there.
And the parents are nervous as well.
Like, I mean,
I went to bottom age under 12 trials on Sunday morning
and within about two minutes of doing a contested layout drill,
uh, we had two parents on the court trying to coach their kids.
I mean, they're they're not bad people because of it,
but they're just really nervous for their kids
as well. For coaches, especially young coaches. Not be
afraid to converse with parents like
I know you know you you always
as a younger coach, you'll always get your backups.
You think Oh, you know, they're judging me. But
the reality is, the more communication you got,
the better chance you've got of everything running smoothly on
that day and and just setting clear guidelines and clear,
clear framework around.
This is what we're gonna do. This is how the day will
go
from
there.
Yeah,
and every parent interaction is in conflict. It's really easy
to
think that
it's sometimes they're just generally nice people saying, Hey,
uh, and the kid's forgotten his drink bottle.
I'll just throw it to him And, you know, I'm just telling him it's over there on that,
Ben, it's It's those sorts of things as well.
So
it's,
um it's just a different world when you're
getting into the trial because everyone is on.
I think that's also part of evaluation as well. If the kid looking you know
there's not much separation there from Mum and Dad,
then that's an athlete that you know.
You're gonna have to spend time on that with so everything.
You're constantly being evaluated.
We say to our green and gold athletes all the time. You're always being evaluated.
That's mum and dad, too. You know,
that's
reality.
That's really, really,
really important that these athletes and families know that
this evaluation goes longer than a three hour camp in Shepparton
or wherever it
is like this evaluation goes January 1 through to December 31.
Uh, everything you do is
towards a certain goal,
and we constantly evaluate whether it's on the floor off the floor.
Uh, and cultures in our pathway are being evaluated, too. All the
same,
we preach a lot is
just cos you don't make it doesn't mean you're not a good athlete.
Just because you don't make it
doesn't mean that the next person isn't going to
think you're good enough like selections are subjective.
So
really trying to give that framework on this is what we feel right now.
This is why you've missed out. But,
you know, and likewise, if they make it, you know, again, that's subjective.
You know, you might have the next coach who goes well. No, I don't agree with that.
You're not good enough at that and and being able to deal with that and handle that so
and you gotta be across your athletes with that as well.
I think, um,
sometimes there's more value in being the 10th kid in the
first team rather than the first kid in the second team.
and other times
flips. It's It
is one of those things where coaches are going to be
a little bit selective about who they choose for their team,
obviously.
But if you're not gonna play the kid,
you're probably better off not picking them like let them go and play.
What do you guys feel about how many kids should be in the team?
Like I've got some pretty strong views on that? I always just thought it was 10.
Yeah, but since I've been in the role in the last, you know, six or seven months,
I've learnt that there are some associations that,
um depending on what the team is within the age group, uh,
gravitate towards a nine or an eight.
So that's
I think it's interesting.
A
year older kids can probably deal with 10 cos they tend to deal with, uh,
injuries a little bit more like they have longer-term Injuries like
11 and 12 year olds seem to bounce back from a rolled
ankle within about seven or eight minutes most of the time,
whereas an under 18 athlete, they roll an ankle that can be anywhere from
two weeks to six weeks, so
My big thing on it is you don't get better unless you play
like you can train every single day.
Unless you get to try an error in a real 40 minute game,
chances are you're not gonna get better.
So I'm I'm massive on, you know,
VC level being nine players and then anything underneath eight.
Because you know, I want
the athlete to be able to play. And you know, what?
If there's only seven players there one week, well,
that's just a little bit more pressure, like that's my mindset with it.
I definitely agree with teams going to nationals and
the back to back to, you know, th those sorts of events
definitely need 10, if not 12.
But, uh, you know, the weak gap in between, I think, really,
you know, the only challenge on that is well,
what this practise environment look like need 10, etcetera, etcetera.
And
I fully understand that, but from a absolute
development mindset,
I really believe that you gotta give the kids
an opportunity to play and some meaningful minutes,
not your two minutes.
Yeah, and that's it. Like, it's gotta be some meaningful minutes.
Uh, so
we've got to that point where we're comfortable with our teams, they're all picked.
They're all selected. We've got our four or five teams. Whatever the case, maybe
How are you guys announcing them?
Because I know from like, I mean, I'll speak from a V JB L level
if you want to take the state level and just and take the aus level,
Um, like, I know from a V JB L level, I screwed it up, Uh,
one of the first years I ever did this, and we announced it online,
which, you know, no issue with that. A lot of clubs do do that.
Uh, the issue is we announced it it at sort of 10 a.m.
on a school day.
Um,
you know, technology being what it is,
kids were very adept at jumping online and finding out they may
have missed the first team and that ends their world fairly quickly.
This is also true,
moving forward potentially as well. But
I was also there,
the kid that got picked so I wasn't really thinking
about you know how this kid's rolled out either.
So
it's it is one of those things where, uh, you need to be a little bit mindful, and
it's now become a little bit of a practise that, hey,
teams will go up at 5 p.m. on a weekday.
So
at least that way, if the kids are checking as well,
they're more likely to have family around them.
So whether they've been disappointed or
if they're disappointed or if they're happy,
they've at least got a little bit of a support network there
as well.
Yeah, uh,
selection for, uh, state teams this year varied.
We had some coaches make phone calls,
We had some send emails and we had some announce it on the day after selection.
Uh, with our state teams,
uh, again, that was a comfort level thing with the coach.
In all cases, though, uh, feedback provided,
uh, at the athlete's discretion.
As soon as you want that feedback or you want to meet with the coach,
then all of that is, uh,
is definitely available to the athletes.
Uh, with NITP selection this year, we sent, uh, snail mail
a little bit of, uh, handwrit ma
or
hand sign mail out to the athletes
waiting.
2017.
Um, which I just liked from, um, from my perspective,
and I've still got letters that I have at or
Mum and Dad's house from that I received as a junior
your signatures on some kids walls at the moment with their, uh,
their framed in ITP letter or
one
of the
It's at a
level.
So I guess ours is, um, we've only got 16 to 18 athletes in camp,
so it's really personal from start to end.
Uh,
we would meet as a full staff with each athlete
the process we went through with the recent, uh, selection,
and seventeens was basically
let the athlete give us feedback on how they felt they went.
And we added that to their rhythm feedback
that went back to the state high performance manager
and to the athlete, which, uh is the first time we've done that.
But I found it really valuable that
there was a column there that they could see how they
felt and mirrored that up with with how we felt,
um, successful nonsuccessive.
Every athlete got written feedback, but it is short and sharp. It's, uh,
one of the processes we use is we provide
two dot points that
this is how we feel you went,
Congrats. You're in or sorry you were unsuccessful so that
we've given them the info before they hear either of that,
because the second they hear that they're not thinking about it.
And it
it's tough. Like, uh,
it's probably the worst part.
And the best part about coaching is telling a kid they've made
a national team. And then to also tell a kid that they haven't right now. But
that's been the process we've used in in previous campaigns. Very similar.
Yeah, uh, face to face. So in terms of giving feedback, uh, you sort of say,
two dot points that I like you discussed that kids can ask feedback as well.
Uh, I've always gone, um, similar two
points.
Uh, but I usually put them under the headings of Stop, start, keep, uh, things.
We need you to stop doing things.
We need you to start doing things you need to keep doing,
um, and just sort of break it up a little bit for them that way as well,
Because generally all our feedback is always written.
So while verbal feedback
is always give them in in writing form,
um, we would always frame from a you know, big country point of view around those five
key selection areas.
Um, the AUS one's very different.
It's more than two dot points, but it's it's just a you know,
this is basically where you're at sort of thing, really kind of detailed to,
but not, but not overkill.
12 things. It's
23 things and away you go metro similar. Like you have to have that shopping list.
Like, how are these athletes being evaluated? That should be clear cut for them.
Uh, and then the feedback not only just giving them feedback around those points,
but this is how
good athletes in the past have addressed this.
You know,
they've become better one on one players by doing
X or they've become better shooters by doing X.
Uh, cos that's important because you I hope that the athlete takes the feedback,
uh, and then starts to develop that resilient mindset to OK,
I'll take this on and get better at this.
So next time I show up,
uh, I'm gonna get selected. Definitely.
And it's one of those things, too, where, I mean, especially at the, uh,
the state or the aus level,
Just because they miss out on a team doesn't mean they're a bad player, you know,
Usually they're a very talented player.
They just may not fit what's around them at the moment.
And then the other thing is, every athlete deserves feedback,
like every single athlete.
And,
um, you know, often one of the hard ones is when
you've gone through success with an athlete and then they miss out on the next team
how, you know, like, but
that same athlete still deserves that feedback. You can't just go.
Oh, well, you know, I don't want to deal with that cos it's hard.
Every single athlete deserves fever. And what's their response to it as well?
Yeah, it's, uh,
and that's something we'll talk about in some of the later podcasts in terms
of how to deal with athletes that
may experience disappointment and things like that.
But
that's where we'll go for now. It, uh,
that is us for this week, thanks to all our listeners as well.
And, uh, that's probably what
your parents, my parents, um, you know,
close loved ones So we might have about six people.
Listen to this, but hopefully along the way,
this go gains a little bit of a following,
and we get a little bit of interaction as well with, uh,
with the listeners out there.
If you've got any questions or topics you'd like us to discuss, please drop us.
An email at basketball at Victoria.
Alright, for the shot clock this week, we have Justin Shaw.
We have 24 seconds to get as much information out of him as we can.
You ready to go?
Sure. Excellent. Let's hit it. First team you coached?
Uh, can't remember. I'll go first Championship team North Halo Rockets suck.
Favourite NBA team
The Spurs Favourite NBL team
Uh, the one that employs me.
Excellent favourite WNBL team stay with Country Bendigo. Fair enough.
Most use coaching phrase.
Trust the pass.
Uh, any coaching superstitions?
Uh, pass it before each year.
Coach, you always steal from, uh, stack. Always favourite coaching website.
Uh, Google and favourite coaching podcast
Blue
and coaching New Ponder